Issued by the Mayo Clinics health newsletter!

   This  Pain killer and alcohol can make a  lethal  combination: 
says the Mayo Clinic's newsletter.
    Acetaminophen  has  become a popular drug,  especially  since 
1955  when it first became available without prescription in  the 
United  States.  It  is  best known in  America  by  the  heavily 
advertised  brand names Tylenol and Datril.  Nevertheless,  it is 
present either alone or in a combination with other drugs in more 
than  200  over-the-counter formulations promoted for  relief  of 
pain, cough and colds. 

    In equivalent dosage,  acetaminophen is just as effective  as 
aspirin in relieving mild pain and reducing fever. In contrast to 
aspirin,  acetaminophen  does not irritate the stomach lining  or 
interfere  with  the  role  of  blood  platelets  in  controlling 
bleeding  from  small  blood  vessels.  Also,  it  has  not  been 
associated with Reye's syndrome. For these reasons, this drug has 
been  heavily  promoted  as a safe aspirin  substitute.           

     When  taken  in  recommended  amounts,  acetaminophen  is  a 
remarkably  safe medication.  Yet,  if ingested in large  amounts 
(for example,  either inadvertently or in a suicide attempt, this 
drug  can  cause  severe liver and kidney  damage.  Until  recent 
years,  acetaminophen poisoning has been infrequently  recognized 
in  America.  In contrast,  for reasons that are unclear,  deaths 
from overdosage often have been reported from the United  Kingdom 
(where the drug is called paracetamol).

 Alcohol and acetaminophen

     After excessive alcohol consumption,  many people experience 
abdominal  distress caused by inflammation of the stomach  lining 
(gastritis),  brought  on by the alcohol.  Aspirin also can cause 
gastritis.  Because  acetaminophen  does not  have  this  effect, 
people who drink heavily often use it in preference to aspirin.

     When  intoxicated,  people often behave  irrationally.  Drug 
overdoses are common.

     Now  there is some evidence that certain alcoholics may have 
a  particular sensitivity to the toxic effects of  acetaminophen. 
There are several recent reports of severe liver damage and death 
in  alcoholics  who  have  taken little  more  than  the  maximum 
recommended  dose of acetaminophen.  Although at present not  all 
experts agree about this possible risk,  we believe that  persons 
who  drink heavily should take acetaminophen with great  caution. 
Alcohol  also  may  interact  with a variety  of  other  commonly 
prescribed  drugs and lead to unexpected and sometimes  dangerous 
effects.   Our  recommendation  - don't  mix  alcohol  with   any 
medication   unless  you  have  discussed  the  risks  with  your 
physician.       

RHEUMATOIDARTHRITISRONAOSTEOARTHRITISPHYSIOTHERAPYHERBALISM
NATURAL THERAPIES FOR ARTHRITIS - Zoltan P. Rona 


NATURAL THERAPIES FOR ARTHRITIS - Zoltan P. Rona, M.D., M.Sc. 
------------------------------------------------------------
Arthritis is a disease of the joints characterized by pain, swelling,
redness,
heat, and, at times, structural changes.  The two most common forms, 
osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, are more common in women than
men. 

Osteoarthritis involves the gradual deterioration of cartilage usually
in the 
larger, weight-bearing joints such as the hips, knees, and spine.
This wear 
and tear is thought by doctors to be a normal and inevitable process
in people
age 55 and older.  By the eighth decade, approximately 90% of all
people have 
some degree of osteoarthritis. 

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic joint disease affecting one or more
joints,
usually those of the hands and feet, particularly the knuckle and toe
joints.
The synovium and other parts of the joint may gradually become
inflamed and 
swollen with tissue destruction and deformities occurring in the most
severe 
cases.  Rheumatoid arthritis, unlike osteoarthritis, is a condition
that waxes
and wanes, occurring as a single attack or as several episodes which
leave the
victim increasingly disabled.  The disease may also be associated with
damage 
to the lungs, heart, nerves and eyes.  Although this form of arthritis 
predominantly affects those between the ages of 40 and 60, it can also 
affect children and teenagers (Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis). The
cause of 
the disease is unknown but considered to be an autoimmune process
(components 
of the  immune system attacking the joints).  

Conventional medicine treats arthritis with anti-inflammatory drugs
(most 
commonly aspirin)  and physiotherapy.  In severe cases of Rheumatoid 
arthritis, more potent anti-inflammatory drugs are used: nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs such as Indomethacin, cortisone-like drugs, 
antimalarials, gold salts, penicillamine and even experimental
cytotoxic 
drugs. Although this approach may produce pain relief, it does little,
if 
anything, to alter the arthritic process itself.  Surgical removal of
badly 
inflamed joint synovium may be required (synovectomy), arthroplasty
(joint 
realignment and reconstruction), tendon repair, arthrodesis (joint
fusion) 
and even artificial joint replacement. 

Conventional medical treatments for arthritis are a multi-billion
dollar a 
year industry.  The failure of drugs and surgery to produce a cure in
the 
majority of sufferers has led millions in North America to seek
alternatives 
such as acupuncture, chiropractic,  nutritional, herbal, homeopathic
and 
folk therapies. For the most part, the medical profession approves of
very 
few of these alternatives, claiming that there is no proof of
efficacy.  

Nutritional approaches to arthritis seem to have the most supporting 
scientific research and documentation behind them.  For example,
weight 
reduction, particularly in those suffering from osteoarthritis of the
hips,
knees and ankles may be very important.  Losing weight alleviates some
of the 
stress on the joints. The main types of foods that should be reduced
as much 
as possible are refined carbohydrates (sugar and white  flour
products) and 
animal fats (especially those found in red meats). 

There are certain types of fats, however, which may, in higher than
average 
intake amounts, act in the same way as standard anti-inflammatory
drugs.  
Examples of this include cold-pressed linseed oil (Flaxseed oil),
gamma 
linolenic acid (GLA found in Evening Primrose Oil) and EPA (found in
cod 
liver oil, halibut liver oil, salmon oil, shark oil and many others).  
Increasing these in the diet or taking them in encapsulated supplement
form 
while decreasing the intake of saturated animal fats can have a
remarkably 
good anti-inflammatory effect. D,L-Phenylalanine is an amino acid
which has 
been shown to help release the body's own natural opiates (endorphins)
and 
can provide substantial pain relief naturally.  Unfortunately, this  
product is only available in the U.S.A. in health food stores. 

In osteoarthritis, optimizing the body's trace mineral balance may be
crucial.
It is therefore necessary to avoid foods known to interfere with
mineral
absorption such as bran, coffee and tea.  Minerals that may be
involved in 
osteoarthritis include iron, zinc, copper, manganese, calcium,
magnesium, 
boron and selenium.  Vitamins such as A, B-complex, C, beta-carotene, 
bioflavonoids and E can be supplemented in higher than RDA doses
because of 
their anti-oxidant properties that help prevent certain aspects of 
inflammation.  The recommended intake doses for all these nutrients
would have 
to be determined for the individual by a qualified health care
practitioner
based on  appropriate biochemical tests. 

Many arthritis sufferers have reported benefits from the use of
certain herbs.
Alfalfa, for example, has been extensively studied.  It contains many 
important substances including saponins, sterols, flavonoids,
coumarins, 
alkaloids, vitamins, amino acids, minerals, trace elements and other 
nutrients.  Aside from its ability to lower blood cholesterol levels
through 
its saponin content, numerous clinical and anecdotal (unproven)
reports 
support its use in arthritis treatment.  Other herbs that have been 
reported to have beneficial effects for arthritis include devil's
claw, 
comfrey and sassafras.  Like vitamin and mineral supplements, herbs
are not 
without their side effects and are best administered and supervised by
an 
experienced health care  practitioner.     

There are a growing number of studies which demonstrate the
relationship
between food allergies (hypersensitivity) and arthritis.  The
purported 
benefits of juice or water fasting for all types of arthritis may
simply be 
because the fast eliminates the food or foods to which the person is 
allergic. For years, anecdotal reports have suggested that some
individuals 
are adversely affected by plants from the Solanacea group (the
Nightshades).
These include tomatoes, potatoes, eggplants, peppers, paprika and
tobacco.  
It certainly can do no harm for an arthritis sufferer to exclude these
foods 
from the diet for at least two months to see whether or not avoidance
has any 
impact on the disease process.  For those who find the rigors of
fasting and 
food elimination diets too inconvenient, there now exist some very
good blood 
tests (IgG4 RAST and the ELISA/ACT test) which can pick up allergies
to not 
only the Nightshades but also to  other hidden food
hypersensitivities.   

In some people that react adversely to all foods (pan-allergic), the 
possibility of an intestinal tract parasitic or fungal (Candida)
infection 
needs to be investigated and treated before starting on a food allergy 
elimination program.  Although one cannot say that parasites or
Candida cause 
arthritis, many nutrition oriented physicians and clinical ecologists
have 
reported successes in the treatment of arthritis when either the
Candida or 
parasitic infection was cleared first.  

The wearing of copper bracelets may be beneficial to many arthritis
sufferers.
Double blind studies have proven that copper from the bracelet can
penetrate 
the skin and produce an ant-inflammatory effect.  Assorted anecdotal
reports
have claimed beneficial effects with supplemental Niacinamide (vitamin
B3), 
the New Zealand green-lipped mussel (mucopolysaccharide content) and
DMSO.  
Many homeopathic remedies have been used for arthritis. Since the
right 
remedy alleviating the symptoms may be different for different
individuals, 
the best thing to do is see a homeopath who  can take a proper case
history 
and prescribe the remedy on an individual basis. 

Let us not forget the very important body/mind/spirit connection or 
pscho-nueuro-immunology, as some would like to term it.  This is a
vast 
subject that requires an individual to do quite a bit of personal work
and 
study.  Authors that are widely read in this field include Louise Hay,
Dr. 
Deepak Chopra, Dr. Norman Shealy, Dr. Bernie Siegel, Shakti Gawain,
Norman 
Cousins and dozens of others.   Over the years, I have noticed that
people 
who suffer from  arthritis are reflecting feelings of anger,
frustration, 
irritation or resentment.  Such individuals are often obsessed with 
controlling another person or with being controlled by the emotional
or 
psychological needs of someone with whom they are closely involved.  
This scenario seems to be more obvious in auto-immune forms of
arthritis such
as rheumatoid arthritis but may also be present in other
types. Meditation, 
yoga, self-healing techniques of various types, Trager massage or 
psychotherapy may all be effective in alleviating both conscious and 
subconscious feelings that lie at the bottom of arthritis. 

There are no quick and lasting remedies that work in all cases.  One
of the 
most important things that must be stressed in any holistic program
for 
arthritis is that treatment is long term.  Sufferers should be
prepared to 
actively involve themselves in all aspects of therapy and not just
passively 
wait for something to happen.  Any holistic approach requires a far
greater 
degree of self responsibility than just taking aspirins. Occasionally
one 
hears of spontaneous remissions or overnight successes with the 
"right remedy", but the vast majority take 3-6 months or more to
stabilize.  

Unfortunately, there are resistant cases where anti-inflammatory drugs
cannot 
be avoided if one wants to prevent joint destruction.  The safest
thing to do
is to consider the drugless approach to arthritis as complementary
rather than 
alternative therapy.  A  holistic health care practitioner's guidance
is
essential.  

REFERENCES 

Blake, D.R.; Lunec, J. 
1) Copper 2) iron
free radicals and arthritis. Br J Rheumatol  1985 May;24(2):123-5. 

Nuki, G. Apatite associated arthritis. Br J Rheumatol 1985
May;23(2):81-3. 

Dieppe, P.A.; Doherty, M.; Macfarlane, D.G.; Hutton, C.W.; Bradfield,
J.W.; 
Watt, I.  
Apatite associated destructive arthritis. Br J Rheumatol 1985
May;23(2):84-91. 

Chen, L.H.; Liu, S.; Newell, M.E.; Barnes, K. 
Survey of drug use by the elderly and possible impact of drugs on 
nutritional status. Drug Nutr Interact 1985;3(2):73-86. 

Solomons, N.W. 
Biochemical, metabolic, and clinical role of 3) copper in human
nutrition. 
J Am Coll Nutr 1985;4(1):83-105. 

Crary, E.J.; McCarty, M.F. 
Potential clinical applications for high-dose nutritional 4)
antioxidants. 
Med Hypotheses 1984 Jan;13(1):77-98. 

Krupp, M.A. and Chatton, M.J. (Ed). 
Current Medicinal Diagnosis and Treatment.  Lange Medical
Publications, U.S.A.,
1984. pp. 367-368. 

The Arthritis Foundation. Home Care Programs In Arthritis. 1314 Spring
St. NW,
MOBILIZATIONWEDGETHORACICDISCLESIONSPESTERPHYSIOTHERAPYBACK
MOBILIZATION WEDGE FOR THORACIC DISC LESIONS - Olive K. Pester,
M.C.S.P. M.C.P.A.



MOBILIZATION WEDGE FOR THORACIC DISC LESIONS 

Olive K. Pester, M.C.S.P. M.C.P.A.

   Although  many  physiotherapists  are  able  to  diagnose  and 
effectively treat patients with cervical and lumbar disc lesions, 
patients having thoracic disc lesions may suffer unnecessary pain 
or  receive misguided treatment when their condition is  labelled 
as  fibrositis  of  the  chest  wall,  pleurodynia,  inter-costal 
neuritis, and so forth.
   Diagnosis is not difficult,  however, if thoracic disc lesions 
are kept in mind.  The influence of both posture and exertion, on 
the  pain,  should be elicited in the patient's history,  and the 
movements of the thoracic spine should then be tested.

Evaluation of clinical data
   The only basis for deciding whether or not to manipulate is  a 
careful  and  informed  evaluation  of  the  clinical  data.  The 
articular,  dural,  root  and  cord  signs  should  be  carefully 
evaluated,  and  if there is any evidence of pyramidal  pressure, 
manipulation is absolutely contraindicated.
   The  difficult  cases are those with a primary  posterolateral 
onset.  Root  pain  is felt in the anterior  thorax  or  abdomen, 
emerging  without  previous backache.  A physician  must  examine 
these  patients  and  rule  out any involvement  of  the  viscera 
(heart,  lungs,  stomach, and so on). Vertebral manipulation will 
relieve pains of spinal origin,  but not those correctly ascribed 
to the viscera.
   In the orthopaedic department, most patients with spinal joint 
pain  are  suffering from a minor displacement of a  fragment  of 
disc.  It  is immaterial whether the disc is thin  or  thick,  or 
whether  osteophytes are present or not.  X-rays are used to help 
rule   out  the  pathologies  not  treatable   by   manipulation: 
osteoporosis,   ankylosing  spondylitis,   rheumatoid  arthritis, 
fractures, tumors, neoplasms, and so on.
   The  diagnosis  of thoracic disc problems is arrived at  by  a 
"Cyriax-type  assessment" which involves examining for  articular 
signs and for dural signs and symptoms.

Mobilization/manipulation technique
   The  simplest  and most effective method of treating  thoracic 
disc  problems is by a mobilization/manipulation of the  thoracic 
spine.  The  results of the treatment,  for  disc  problems,  are 
unusually excellent.  Three hundred patients having thoracic disc 
problems  were  treated in this manner during a  recent  12-month 
period at the author's clinic. Treatment ranged from two to eight 
sessions, depending on the number of levels involved in the spine 
and  the  degree of stiffness,  pain and  symptoms  present.  The 
success rate has been better than 90 per cent.
   The  main  problem is to inculcate in the patient a desire  to 
maintain  the    erect  posture  for much  of  his  working  day. 
Although slouching may be harmful for any areas of the spine,  it 
is  disastrous  for  the thoracic  region.  A  follow-up  program 
including swimming,  walking,  dancing,  fencing - all activities 
that encourage an awareness of posture and relaxation - should be 
recommended to the patient.

The wedge: aid to mobilization
   A common problem of the  treatment,  mobilization/manipulation 
of the thoracic spine,  occurs when a 5'4" female physiotherapist 
attempts  to  mobilize the thoracic spine of a  6'2",  200  pound  
patient.  By  the  time the physiotherapist has placed  her  hand 
around  the  chest wall of the patient,  to fixate  the  thoracic 
spine  being  treated,  she  frequently has no power  and  little 
leverage left with which to mobilize the offending joint.
   A  small  wedge  has therefore  been  developed  by  Norwegian 
physiotherapist  Freddy  Kaltenborn  as an aid  to  the  painless 
mobilization of the thoracic spine.  It enables a physiotherapist 
to  mobilize successfully,  and with little physical effort,  the 
thoracic spine of large, heavy patients.
   Construction: the wedge is made of molded polypropylene with a 
base measuring nine inches and a height of three and  one-quarter 
inches. The central groove, in which the spinous process fits, is 
one inch across.
   Directions  for  use:  the patient lies supine and clasps  his 
neck in such a way that his elbows are brought together over  his 
sternum.  The  therapist stands on the right side and grasps  the 
patient's elbows with her left hand. She rolls him toward herself 
and  firmly  fixes the thoracic vertebrae to be mobilized  within 
the groove of the wedge.  The wedge now acts as a fulcrum and the 
physiotherapist,  by leaning over the patient, can thrust through 
the  patient's  elbow in a downward direction.  By  altering  the 
position of the wedge or by altering the degree of flexion of the 
thoracic  spine,  the physiotherapist can mobilize or  manipulate 
all thoracic joints in this manner.

Conclusion
   The wedge has been used for over a year in the author's clinic 
and  is  recommended in the treatment of patients  with  thoracic 
disc problems.  In cases involving the toracic spine,  it is  the 
maintenance  of  a  reduction  which  is  difficult.   After  the 
mobilization  manipulation  procedure,  a  program  of  extension 
exercises must be initiated.

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 
